Complete content for RStudio IDE docs (#12075)
rstudio/rstudio: docs/user/rstudio/ide/guide/tools/terminal.qmd

title: "Terminal"
---

The RStudio terminal provides access to the system shell from within the RStudio. It supports full-screen terminal applications such as vim, Emacs, and tmux as, well as regular command-line operations with line-editing and shell history.

Potential uses of the shell including advanced source control operations, execution of long-running jobs, remote logins, system administration of Posit Workbench or RStudio Server, and the aforementioned full-screen terminal programs.

This article does not attempt to cover fundamentals on when and how to use a system shell. Instead, it focuses on the features, design, options, and limitations of the RStudio terminal feature itself.

Unlike most RStudio features, the nature of the terminal leads to several platform-specific differences. These primarily break down into two categories: Windows, and everything else (Mac, Linux, and Server). Windows provides emulators for unix-based terminals such as Git Bash, Windows Subsystem for Linux, or PowerShell.

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started
```

The **Terminal tab** is next to the **Console tab**. Click on the Terminal tab and a new terminal session will be created (if there isn't one already).

> -   If the tab isn't visible, show it via **Tools** \> **Terminal** \> **Move Focus to Terminal** (or use the kebyoard shortcut <kbd>Shift+Alt+T</kbd>).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   If the tab isn't visible, display it via **Tools** \> **Terminal** \> **Move Focus to Terminal** (or use the keyboard shortcut <kbd>Shift+Alt+T</kbd>).
```

Author: Changed

> -   If the tab isn't visible, display it via **Tools** \> **Terminal** \> **Move Focus to Terminal** (or use the keyboard shortcut <kbd>Shift+Alt+T</kbd>).

Reviewer 3: the linked [keyboard shortcut page](https://colorado.rstudio.com/rsc/rstudio-user-guide-2022-09-29/ide/reference/shortcuts.html#terminal) has this as shift + alt + m

Author: Confirmed that Alt+Shift+M is the default - changed, thank you!

> -   The full list of terminal-related keyboard shortcuts is in the Reference: Keyboard Shortcuts [Terminal section](../../reference/shortcuts.html#terminal). Most terminal-related commands can be found on the **Terminal dropdown** menu in the terminal pane, and on the **Tools-\>Terminal** menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   The full list of terminal-related keyboard shortcuts is in the Reference: Keyboard Shortcuts [Terminal section](../../reference/shortcuts.html#terminal). Most terminal-related commands can be found on the **Terminal drop-down** menu in the terminal pane, and on the **Tools-\>Terminal** menu.
```

Author: changed

Here's a terminal with the output of simple command:

![](images/terminal-basic.png){fig-alt="screenshot of terminal showing simple output"}

The visual appearance of the terminal is controlled via the **Tools** \> **Global Options** \> **Appearance** settings. 

## Multiple Terminals

> RStudio supports multiple terminal sessions. To start another terminal session, use the **New Terminal** command on the Terminal dropdown menu, or <kbd>Alt+Shift+R</kbd>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RStudio supports multiple terminal sessions. To start another terminal session, use the **New Terminal** command on the Terminal drop-down menu, or <kbd>Alt+Shift+R</kbd>.
```

Author: Changed

![](images/terminal-menu.png){fig-alt="screenshot showing terminal menu opened"}
Each terminal session is independent, with its own system shell process and buffer. Switch between them by:

1. Using the arrows next to the drop-down menu  
2. Clicking on the terminal's name in the drop-down  

> 3. Using the **Previous Terminal**/**Next Terminal** drop-down menu commands. The dropdown button shows the name of the currently selected terminal session ("Terminal 1" in the following screenshot):  

Reviewer 2: This should be an unordered list if you do not have to complete each item in this order.

Author: Resolved with unordered list.

> 1. Using the arrows next to the drop-down menu  
> 2. Clicking on the terminal's name in the drop-down  
> 3. Using the **Previous Terminal**/**Next Terminal** drop-down menu commands. The dropdown button shows the name of the currently selected terminal session ("Terminal 1" in the following screenshot):  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Using the arrows next to the drop-down menu  
- Clicking on the terminal's name in the drop-down  
- Using the **Previous Terminal**/**Next Terminal** drop-down menu commands. The drop-down button shows the name of the currently selected terminal session ("Terminal 1" in the following screenshot):  
```

Author: resolved to unordered list and drop-down

![](images/terminal-menu-labeled.png){fig-alt="screenshot showing navigation between multiple terminals"}

> ## Terminal Names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Terminal names
```

Reviewer: Check other section title casing on this page as well

## Execute in Terminal

When editing files in the RStudio editor, any selection (or the current line if nothing is selected) can be sent to the active terminal via <kbd>Ctrl+Alt+Enter</kbd> (<kbd>Cmd+Alt+Enter</kbd> on the Mac). If a single-line was sent to the terminal the cursor will advance automatically to the next line, allowing single-stepping.

In following example:  

1. A simple Python source file was loaded
2. A Python interpreter started in the current terminal
3. Ctrl+Alt+Enter used to step through the script:

![](images/terminal-python.png){fig-alt="screenshot of a simple Python REPL example"}

This is just an example; for more powerful integrated Python support [look at the reticulate package](https://rstudio.github.io/reticulate/).

If a shell file is being edited (`*.sh`), <kbd>Ctrl+Enter</kbd> (<kbd>Cmd+Enter</kbd> on Mac) can be used to single-step, as can the **Run** toolbar button. This will also work on Windows, but no check is done that the shell-type loaded in the active terminal session matches the commands being sent.

![](images/terminal-shell.png){fig-alt="screenshot example of running a shell script"} 

> Note that the **Run Script** button does the same as prior versions of RStudio, and will save and run the entire script via `system()` in the R Console. This button does not appear in Windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **Run Script** button does the same as prior versions of RStudio and will save and run the entire script via `system()` in the R Console. This button does not appear in Windows.
```

Author: changed

## Busy Terminals

Programs running in a terminal do not block the rest of the RStudio user-interface, so work can continue working in RStudio even when one or more terminal sessions have a child process running.

A terminal with child processes is considered *busy* by RStudio, and will have:

1. **(busy)** next to the terminal name.

> 2. The close **x** changes to a **STOP** button.

Reviewer 2: This could also be an unordered list

Author: I refer to these in the screenshot by number. Is that ok?

<img width="1073" alt="terminal-sleep" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29187501/193869191-4c377375-1e01-4655-8944-3effd5566384.png">

Author: @AshleyHenry15 - does that work ok?

![](images/terminal-close.png){fig-alt="The RStudio integrated terminal, highlighting the 'x' button to close."}

![screenshot showing a busy terminal](images/terminal-sleep.png){fig-alt="screenshot showing a busy terminal"}

This "busy detection" feature is only available on Mac, Linux, and Posit Workbench / RStudio Server and not on Windows.

## Closing Terminal Sessions

> To close a terminal session, use the **Close Terminal** command on the Terminal dropdown menu, click the **x** on the far-right of the Terminal pane toolbar, or type **exit** from within the shell itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To close a terminal session, use the **Close Terminal** command on the Terminal drop-down menu, click the **x** on the far-right of the Terminal pane toolbar, or type **exit** from within the shell itself.
```

Author: Changed

As discussed earlier, if a terminal is currently busy, the **x** changes to a **STOP** button.

Clicking the **STOP** button will trigger the **Interrupt Current Terminal** command, sending an interrupt to the terminal; this may close the currently running program (the program itself decides what to do when receiving an interrupt), but will not close the terminal.

Finally, if the terminal feature it not useful to your workflow, you can remove the tab altogether by clicking the **x** on the Terminal tab itself. This will close all running terminal sessions, including any custom-named terminal sessions. Subsequent instances of RStudio will not show the Terminal tab: to bring it back, use **Tools** \> **Terminal** \> **Move Focus to Terminal** (keyboard shortcut: <kbd>Shift+Alt+T</kbd>).

> 

Reviewer 3: shortcut may need to be updated to shift + alt + m (see above comment)

Author: Changed - thanks!
